another one of the core aspects of procedural sharing
is that you can use elements of randomization.
That is useful for example to automatically
generate any number of random variations of a
shader to avoid repetition or to introduce
aspects of variation into the shader itself.
There are different methods of implementing randomization
in a procedural shader and blender.
And in this video I want to go over the most fundamental and common ones
and give some simple examples.
The more specific application of these methods to create
shakers can be found in the workflow examples.
The first method I want to mention is something I already talked about
in the chapter about space manipulation to create variation in a regular pattern.
By distorting its shape,
can simply distort the korean space that it uses with a noise texture.
This method plays a huge role in making patterns look more natural.
It is used for example,
prominently in the wood textures on two different
levels in the stone wall texture and many,
many more of the shares in the example seen.
Let me quickly go over how to create this effect. Again,
The general idea is to use the color of the
noise texture as a vector map to distort the coordinates
that the texture uses and due to the fact that
the noise texture is centred around values of 0.5,
you cannot simply add the values on top is
that will overall shift the pattern as well.
Instead you can simply use the linear light operation and then you have
a convenient factor parameter to dial and the strength of the distortion effect.
The only problem with this setup is that the factor
now is limited to a range between zero and one.
To prevent that, you can instead subtract a vector of 0.5 for X,
Y and Z from the color noise.
Use a scale note to adjust the strength factor
and add the resulting vector map to the coordinates.
That essentially does the same thing as the linear light operation,
but it gives you more control.
Instead of using a noise texture to influence the initial coordinates,
you can of course, simply applying noise texture on top of the pattern.
A simple way for example,
is to overlay a noise over the texture
using the mixed RgB note that creates some subtle
variation while just as well as the linear
light operation respecting the values center around 0.5.
So bright values lighten the texture while low values darken it,
but depending on your use case,
of course you can also use any other type of operation to mix in the noise texture.
Also that variation can of course be applied in any context of the PBR maps,
creating some variation in the roughness.
For example, it can be very important to selling the authenticity of shader.
Another note I want to recommend for this is the map range note
I mentioned before that the map range note is essentially an advanced mixed note for
values as it dynamically maps values from one range to another that can be used,
for example,
to define the range the pattern is mapped to with
a noise and that way also creates some variation.
I'm using that technique specifically in the work, for example,
showing how I created the procedural would shader.
Another very essential technique of randomization is to use the properties
of a texture when it is divisible into separate cells.
These cells could be multiple things,
the individual boards of the floor, the stones in the wall,
the stones and the chimney and the lines of raindrops on the window.
As long as a texture is divisible into cells like this, it is easy to for example,
give every cell a variation in color roughness or anything else.
That way you can integrate the very structure of
the cell based material into the randomization that you
apply and you don't need to rely on the
sometimes easy to detect look of the noise texture.
Also,
you can use this method of randomization to influence the content of these cells.
If you remember back to the chapter about repetition,
I already quickly show you how to randomize a repetitive pattern by
adjusting the parameters that each one of these repetitions is created with.
I showed this by adjusting the scale of the
flower shapes that were repeated in an infinite pattern.
But this technique can be huge to randomize other properties of a shape.
For example,
I could have used to randomize the number of petals that each of the flowers has.
I can simply use the random index that each cell gets by using
the white noise map it to the range between three and 10,
for example, and then around these values to get the exact number of petals.
That way the shapes within each of these cells can be completely randomized,
but the application of this cell based randomization can go another step further.
Even you can use the randomization of cells to create the base
pattern itself before he referred to every individual board as a cell.
Also, every row of boards can be interpreted as a cell. With this understanding
you can influence how the base pattern itself is created in a randomized way.
For example,
you can easily shift the distribution of the board cells by
a random distance to truly randomize how the pattern is created.
This randomization however,
and this is important is only confined within each one of the cells,
which has to be clearly find in the first place.
So for example,
to create a pattern of actual random cells as a whole different problem,
you can't solve simply by using this technique
now that we're already at the topic of driving cells with parameters of course,
instead of random values, you can also assign each cell with a controlled value.
For example, a simple gradient from left to right,
of course, with all that randomness,
you still want to be in control over how the randomization is applied.
So it is important to be able to control in
what range and with what distribution The values operate.
This is highly connected to statistics,
but I want to go much into the theory behind all of it.
The implication is actually quite simple
if you simply use the white noise texture to give
you a different random value for a different coordinate.
The return values are all between zero and one,
but a lot of the time you want to have random values that are in a different range.
To change this range, you can simply use a map range note
and then you can easily select the new range that the Iranian values are mapped to
by choosing the two men and two max inputs.
But depending on the range that you want to choose,
it's sometimes easier to simply use a math notes set to either
add or multiply as these would give you the same result.
In some cases next After the range of the random values,
let's talk about their distribution.
The distribution of the values, The white noise returns is uniform.
That means that if you split the range between
zero and one and two equally large sections,
a random value is equally probable to land within any one of those sections.
No section is preferred.
That means in return when you use these random values for example,
to randomize the number of petals you get on average the
same amount of flowers with any given number of petals,
so there is no bias simply changing the range of the random
values does not have an effect on the shape of their distribution.
If you want to influence the shape of the distribution
though you can use for example an Rgb curves node,
just make sure you use it before the map range note and you
can influence how probably individual values are
by manipulating them with the curve.
It is not very straightforward how exactly this works,
but it makes sense that when you increase the overall brightness,
the values are higher overall as well.
That way you can influence the values to be biased towards the specific range.
The distribution of the values of the Perlin noise is a
bit more difficult to define as with increasing detail level.
It is technically not a single noise texture anymore,
but in general it is fair to approximate the value distribution of
the noise texture with a bell shaped curve that looks like this.
The values are centered around 0.5 and the symmetrical between zero and one.
In comparison to the uniform distribution,
you can see that values close to 0.5 are much more
likely and values close to one or zero are practically impossible.
That means when you apply to distort texture space,
the coordinates are shifted more gradually,
but also the distribution of this noise can be influenced.
Using for example in Rgb curves note,
you don't have precise control over the distribution as with the white
noise but you can generally adjust where the values should be leaning to
a nice way of controlling randomness for colours is to simply use a
color um node as the random values are usually between zero and one.
You can simply plug them into the value input and
then map those random values two colors of your choice.
In cases where you have multiple instances of the same object in your scene,
you usually want some form of variation between their shader is
to break the repetition that immediately marks them as artificial.
To achieve such variation,
you can simply use the object info note from the
input category which gives you a random value per object.
Usually using this random value to drive the variation of your shader as
a seed is enough to get a different pattern for each object.
For example,
you can simply switch the noise texture that you're using for the
variation to four dimensional space and pluck the random value into the w
input a lot of the time though you have to scale up the
range of this random value as it's also between zero and one.
And keeping it that way might give you two similar results.
A good way to add a certain level of manual
control is to include the object index into the randomization.
The object index can be selected as the past
index in the relations category of the object properties.
And this way you can easily select a different random variation.
By changing this index,
you can simply set the randomization up with this object
index by adding it on top of a random value
when you are using cycles.
You can additionally get a random value per disconnected island of geometry that
can be very useful to randomize patterns for different parts within one object.
For example, if these islands are using the same coordinate space.